Read me file for BAYSPAR prediction code (updated June 2017)

These files make use of the regression parameters fit to the latest TEX86 core top dataset (n = 1095, Tierney and Tingley, 2015, Scientific Data), but excluding data north of 70N due to the poor predictability of TEX86 in the Arctic region.

Two models are available: The SST prediction model and subT prediction model. The latter uses a gamma-weighted average of temperatures between 0-200 meters water depth (see Tierney and Tingley, 2015, Scientific Data). In addition, two modes of prediction are available (see Tierney and Tingley, 2014, GCA for details):

STANDARD PREDICTION

The assumption in this case is that oceanographic conditions are sufficiently similar to today so that it is reasonable to use the spatial distribution of regression parameters as fitted from the core tops.

The `engine' is bayspar_tex.m and usage is demonstrated in Demo_StandardPrediction.m.

The inputs to and outputs from bayspar_tex.m are:

Output_Struct = bayspar_tex(dats, lon, lat, prior_std, runname, varargin)

INPUTS:
dats		- N by 1 vector of TEX86 observations from a single location
lon		- longitude of core site, decimal degrees from -180 to 180
lat		- latitude of core site, decimal degrees from -90 to 90
prior_std 	- prior standard deviation. Try a value like 10 to start. Don't make this too narrow.
runname - defines which model to use. Enter 'SST' or 'subT'.
varargin  	- used to set the number of posterior draws of parameters to mix across, and whether to save only the 5th/50th/95th percentiles of the predictions or the whole ensemble as well.
	- if left empty, then 5000 draws are used and the ensemble of predictions is not saved.
	- if only one argument, it is the number of draws (cannot exceed 15000), and the ensemble is not saved. Note that samples are thinned to use the full span of the ensemble.
	- if two arguments, the first gives the number of draws, while the second is an indicator:
		0: (default) save only the 5th/50th/95th percentiles of the predictions.
		1: save the whole ensemble as well.

OUTPUT:
A structure with the following fields:
.Preds      		- N by 3 array, where N=length(dats), giving the 5/50/95 percentiles of the predictions in degrees C.
.SiteLoc   		- Location of dats, as the inputted [lon, lat].
.GridLoc   		- Location of the grid centroid closest to dats, used to pull the alpha and beta samples.
.PriorMean 	- The prior mean (see below).
.PriorStd  		- The prior std -- same value as specified in the inputs.
.PredsEns  	- Nd by Nsamps array of predictions. Only include if the second optional input is set to 1.

The prior mean is set as the mean over all instrumental SST observations within 500 km of the observations, or the closest data point: whichever has the LARGER number of observations.

The alpha and beta values used in predictions are selected based on the location of the inputted TEX series, and the possibility arises that the sample location will not be within one of the 20 by 20 degree grid boxes that contain core top calibration data. As the alpha and beta fields are modeled as a Gaussian spatial process, we can draw samples at any location conditional on the scalar parameters (mu, phi, sigma) and the values of alpha and beta at the centroids of the grids that contain core top calibration observations. We do so for each of the retained 15000 samples from the posterior distribution of alpha, beta, and the scalar parameters so as to build up the conditional distributions of alpha and beta and the centroids of all 20 by 20 grid boxes. This step is performed off-line and results simply looked up. Note that the distributions of alpha and beta at interpolated locations are necessarily wider, as are the predictive uncertainties. \

ANALOGUE PREDICTION

The assumption in this case is that oceanographic conditions are sufficiently dissimilar than the modern configuration so as to preclude the use of the of the spatial distribution of regression parameters as fitted from the core tops (see Tierney and Tingley, 2014, GCA for details). The regression parameters used to make predictions are instead mixed across location deemed analogous to the sample tex series. In detail, we find all calibration grid boxes with average tex value within some tolerance of the mean of the sample TEX series used to predict SSTs. There is an implicit assumption to the effect that TEX values from the past that are similar to modern TEX values should also feature similar regression parameters. Some assumptions are necessary in order to perform the prediction, and potentially differing continental and oceanic configurations preclude the use of the modern spatial distribution. The analogue methods used here carries all the standard caveats associated with similar techniques used, e.g., in palynology: the so-called "no modern analog problem," potential non-stationarities, etc. \

The `engine' is bayspar_tex_analog.m and usage is demonstrated in Demo_AnalogPrediction.m.

The inputs to and outputs from bayspar_tex_analog.m are:

Output_Struct = bayspar_tex_analog(dats, prior_mean, prior_std, search_tol, runname, varargin)

INPUTS:
dats			- past TEX value or time series. Note that analog selection is performed using the mean of these values.
prior_mean 	- prior mean on temperature. Scalar -- prior mean is assumed constant if dats is a vector.
prior_std  		- prior std on temperature. Scalar --  assumed constant if dats is a vector. Don't make this too narrow.
search_tol 	- tolerance for finding analog locations in TEX units. Comparison is between the mean of dats and the mean tex value within each 20 by 20 grid box. In the demo code, search_tol is specified in terms of standard deviations of the input tex series.
runname           - defines which model to use. Enter 'SST' or 'subT'.
varargin  		- used to set the number of posterior draws of parameters to mix across, and whether to save only the 5th/50th/95th percentiles of the predictions or the whole ensemble as well.
	- if left empty, then 5000 draws are used FOR EACH ANALOG LOCATION and the ensemble of predictions is not saved. 
	- if only one argument, it is the number of draws (cannot exceed 15000) FOR EACH ANALOG LOCATION, and the ensemble is not saved. Note that samples are thinned to use the full span of the ensemble.
	- if two arguments, the first gives the number of draws, while the second is an indicator:
		0: (default) save only the 5th/50th/95th percentiles of the predictions. 
		1: save the whole ensemble as well. 
 
NOTE: if there are a large number of spatial analogs, then the code can be slow as the prediction is performed the inputted number of times (default 5000) times for each spatial analog. Suggest an initial run with Nsamps set low (even to 10), to get a sense of the  number of analogs, and then a subsequent run with a reasonable value of Nsamps so as to end up with 10-20k or so total predictions.

OUTPUT
A structure with the following fields:

Preds      		- Nd by 3 array, where Nd=length(dats), giving the 5/50/95 percentiles of the predictions. 
.AnLocs		- Centroids of the grid cells selected as analogs, as [lon, lat] pairs 
.PriorMean 	- The prior mean as calculated above. 
.PriorStd  		- The prior std as input. 
.PredsEns  	- Nd by No. analog locatioins by Nsamps array of predictions. Only included if ens_sel==1. Note that the second dimension corresponds to the location in .AnLocs.

NOTES:

1. The file Target_All_Predict.m is called by both of the prediction scripts, and need not be touched.
2. All necessary model outputs, as well as some sample TEX series used by the demo scripts, are in the ModelOutput folder, and need not be touched.
